Good morning.
Yes, I shaved it off.
Get that.
Our text for meditation this morning comes to us from our Old Testament reading in Isaiah.
They were all really good scripture lessons, but like this one in Isaiah for this morning, let's begin with the word of prayer.
Dear Father in Heaven, we thank you for how you call and gather us each here today to be with you, to receive from you your word.
Your holy sacrament, the word made flesh, comes to us and we thank you for that.
We thank you for how we can come and gather here and support each other, support each other in time of needs, support each other in time of joy, all because of the love and the mercy and the grace we receive from you.
In your name we pray, amen.
Please have a seat.
Grace, mercy and peace meet you from God, our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
Your brothers and sisters in Christ.
Past couple of years, we have lost three large trees in our yard.
Now, a few years back, I recall telling you about another tree in my yard that, and I think the quote in the sermon was that it was dead dead.
And it was a pomegranate tree.
And two years later, poof.
It's a beautiful life.
We have more pomegranates than ever, so I have to take back the whole illustration that I made in that sermon because it did come back to life.
But we lost two large jokes, and these were, two of them were very difficult for us to lose.
For many years, almost all the time we lived in our house, a hammock was strung between them.
And many memories were made with our children there.
The trees, though, were unceremoniously filled,
removed by the tree service without much emotion or connection.
And I guess nor should there have been on their part.
Nothing left but a stump.
But for us, this meant the end of an era of memories.
No hammock, no leaves, no shade, no green,
No reminder of the promise of life each spring as we would excitedly wait for the new green leaves to push out or the seasons of life when the leaves would wither in fall, which I didn't like.
Over all, the whole event of losing these trees was a depressing event.
It still is.
But today, I think I'd say I use this beautiful, effective imagery
in his reading that we have today in chapter 11.
And the first two verses say a lot.
They read, there shall come forth a shoot from the stump of Jesse and a branch from his roots shall bear fruit.
And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding the spirit of counsel and might the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the Lord.
And sometimes we just read through that, but when we think about it, when we think of what a stump is,
A stump is dead.
I remember a stump that was vivid in my memory was a stump that we would clean fish on when I was a little kid.
That we would go to this lake and there was a big stump there that we used for fish cleaning.
But it was dead.
We knew nothing was going to happen.
There became a table sort of.
But Advent is a season where we were the intent for us anyway is to slow down, anticipate as we prepare our hearts and minds for the coming
of our Savior, Jesus Christ.
And one of the favorite aspects of Advent for me, in addition to the hymns we sing, is to hear and retell the Old Testament prophecies.
Pastor Midon and I were just talking about this last week about the lessons in Carol's service and how all of those readings are just gold and how they stir something inside of you when you start out a genesis of the fall and you go through all of the prophecies announcing and foretelling the birth of our Savior.
Isaiah's prophecy speaks directly to us today, setting the wheels in motion of God's plan to make his presence known to his people.
It's a message of redemption, not learned by our efforts, but for us, and gifted to us through Jesus, through the Messiah.
in these two short verses, these opening verses, we kind of get the whole story.
God's word through Isaiah reveals our fallen state, the stump, the promise of the Savior and the transformed lives that would follow from the redemption that we have in Jesus Christ.
I love the verse, foreign Christ, what was dead is made alive and what was barren, bears fruit for the kingdom.
Many of our hymns this morning kind of reflect that imagery.
A shoot will come up from the stump of Jesse.
In our communion hymn this morning, Lohawa Rose, very famous German hymn, we hear the story re-told.
Jesse was the father of King David, and from David's line came kings of Israel.
And then by Isaiah's time though, the royal, that whole royal line, that whole dynasty had been cut down.
Same story, Israel's disobedience to God, their idolatry, their rebellious nature, led to exile and devastation.
This mighty tree, this mighty dynasty was cut down to the stump.
Lifeless, hopeless, forgotten and adored.
But I like the stump.
The imagery that Isaiah uses in this prophecy, it's really a mirror to our own condition.
We're just getting into this in catechism now, but as Lutherans, we understand that the law of God is that which acts as a curb, a guide, and a mirror.
Yes.
We understand that the law of God and that exposes our sin.
And the law cuts us down.
It does every time.
We are born into this world kind of marred by this original sin related to Adam and Eve, whose same rebellion, whose same behavior against God left humanity and us cut off from God.
our intimacy and our relationship and our connection with Him was forever marred, detached, kind of freed.
The hymn come now fond of every blessing, says it well.
It says, prone to wonder, Lord, I feel it, prone to leave the God I love.
We all have a tendency to push God away.
We kind of start feeling good about ourselves and we want to
Say, okay, I think I got it now, I think I got it now.
And whenever we do that, God has a way of bringing us back now.
Our deeds and our acts and our own selfishness leads us to believe that we kind of know the answers and know best.
We have a tendency to chase after things that never last, the things in life that we put more priority into over God,
all the common ones, money, power, approval, status, popularity, those things that really seem to satisfy us for at a time.
But in the end, like everything else earthly, all those things that we can see, we can touch, we can feel, leave us empty and wanting more, something more.
And we find ourselves on this treadmill trying to bring ourselves happiness and contentment with earthly things.
And so with our eyes only on ourselves, navel gazing, we end up missing opportunities to do what we're supposed to do, to serve and love our neighbor.
We don't have to look far.
Our own families.
They can be broken by our own personal weaknesses, our own behaviors and failings.
We can run smack dab into life altering health and medical issues
which takes away all of our routine, takes away all of our normalness.
We sometimes live in communities that are divided and embroiled in violence.
Those are those people on the edge that from the periphery that are crippled by addiction or despair or hopelessness.
And we do.
We feel like that stump cut off from the life God intended us to have.
And we can't seem to spout that new growth on our own.
The law shows us this truth.
It impacts us not to crush us eternally.
It's not like we get up and smack us down, but it's to drive us to Jesus.
It's to drive us to the gospel.
The Word made flesh for us.
For from this
this dead stump, God produces a tender shoot.
In 1988, I had the chance to go camping in Yellowstone.
It was early in the year, and it was beautiful.
And if you recall, in that year, Yellowstone was devastated by forest fires.
Thousands and thousands of acres burned to the ground.
But I think what was beautiful about God's creation in that, amongst the ashes, the fallen timbers, the charred wood, or the sprouts shooting up, of green from the ash, from the darkness.
And that's the image that Isaiah paints today.
Or from the stump, God produces a tender chute into a branch that will bear fruit.
and the branches in the side.
Jesus Christ born of that line of David that was cut to the stump yet fully God.
And later on in our reading, Isaiah describes Jesus as one upon whom the spirit of the Lord rests, wisdom, understanding, counsel, might, knowledge, and the fear of the Lord.
He has no earthly kingdom relying on earthly power, but it is the divine, the divine Redeemer who is perfect.
and who judges in perfect righteousness that he has.
And he seems that we hear throughout Advent, he upholds the poor and puts to an end wickedness all with the breath of his mouth, the word.
And I love these five words in the fullness of time.
In the fullness of time, God's will was done.
The prophecy was fulfilled in that little Bethlehem stable.
Jesus was that shoot from Jesse's stump.
And like we looked at last week in our gospel, reading came not in pomp and glory, but humility on a donkey.
He lived the perfect life that we could not.
And he took his refuge and his wisdom and his delight in his father.
He taught with wisdom that
Can I confuse the wise?
He healed the sick, fed the hungry, proclaimed good news to the poor.
Themes that are repeated and retold each and every week here during the season of Advent.
And yet, in this season, there's a bit of a paradox.
Our eyes are kind of looking at the manger.
We're looking at the coming of Christ, yet we know that our eyes need to be on the cross.
where Jesus, that baby bore the weight of all of our sin, where he took on sin as himself.
And that acts that felled us in the law that tops us to the core, has turned upon him.
He's received that punishment by his wounds we are healed through his death and his resurrection.
our redemption is accomplished.
This is the heart of what we talk about here, each and every Sunday.
It's the heart of what we do as Christians.
It's not by our merits, but by grace alone, faith alone, and Jesus alone.
Our absolute joy as Christians, I think that's the next
next week's candle, and our joy in living even through all of the struggles of life is the truth, is that truth to which we cling.
Jesus is the branch that revives the stump.
He doesn't demand that we clean ourselves up first.
He comes to us in our deadness and makes us alive.
In our baptism, he binds himself to us.
He grafts himself to us.
And here at this table, the Lord's Supper, he nourishes us with his word made flesh, with his body and blood.
In his word, his living and active word, he breathes his life into our souls.
But a branch will bear fruit as Isaiah goes on.
And what does this fruit look like?
And I love the visual we have here.
Again, reflected in a lot of our hymn, we see a vision of this paradise restored, wolf with a lamb, leopard with a goat, a child leading them all, a lion, no harm, no destruction, only peace, contentment, because the earth is now restored by the Lord.
The fruit that points to this
this transformation to us that Jesus brings.
The fruit is our lives and their service to others in Jesus' name.
Not as a way to earn salvation because that's been one for us, but it's a natural, it's a natural outflow of what God pours into us each and every day through Christ Jesus.
Jesus says, I am divine, you are the branches.
If you remain in me and I am you,
you will bear much fruit.
And I guess for each of us, the fruit looks different.
It's the work and the works of love that flow from us as our response, as our response from our being redeemed and forgiven.
And each of us have different personalities and different ways that we can do that.
But it's done with joy because we're redeemed, we're restored, we're forgiven.
It means forgiving those who wrong us as Christ forgives us.
It means serving those who need to be served, the poor, the lonely, the oppressed.
It's living in faith and recognizing the spirit's gifts within us, using God's wisdom in our decisions, using His counsel in our words, using boldness as we witness.
in our daily vocations.
We've talked a lot about vocations the last few weeks, but it's so true because God gives us each differently.
As parents, workers, neighbors, we bear fruit by reflecting Christ's light.
And it is you and me being in all situations a reflection.
Your face, your countenance, your being of the deep-rooted conditional love that is yours through Jesus Christ.
Are you a reflection of that?
Am I a reflection of that?
To use President Newman's book title, do you struggle well?
Or are you a dour cranky, unhappy, miserable soul that people walk around eggshells by?
But we shouldn't be as Christians.
We are joyfully rooted
to the tree of life, always and forever.
And it's you, it's your fruit.
It's how you convey what Christ has given you inside that helps restore.
It helps restore a family that needs forgiveness.
It helps your community, united in service.
And I think this is the piece that the Messiah that Isaiah foresees
beginning here, beginning with you, with me, each of us here in this church, and finally consummated in the end when Christ returns.
Our service isn't, and it shouldn't be, drudgery.
It's joyful.
It's a response to our redemption.
Luther, and this isn't the exact quote, but good works are the fruit of faith, not its root.
We serve others because Christ first served us.
And yet we are sinners.
Our fruit is often sometimes meager, doesn't look like much.
We falter, we sin, we struggle, we produce thorns, we have bad days.
But all through it, in all stages of our life, in all struggles, that branch sustains us.
We abide in him through the faith he produces in us.
As we journey through our advent,
I like the beautiful vision that Isaiah gives us to keep us joyfully charging into all situations in our lives.
And that's hard to do because we have sad days.
We have unhappy days.
We have days where things are not going well.
But underneath it all, we have an undercurrent of joy because we know how the story ends.
We know where we get our energy.
We know where we get our love.
We know where we get our forgiveness that is unquenchable, that gets poured into us daily.
This world looks at us as Christians, and what do they see?
What are you conveying in your expressions, in your countenance, in your words, in your attitude, in your optimism, or maybe lack of it?
in your positivity or maybe lack of it?
What are you conveying about your faith that drives you when that keeps you strong?
And I think it's something as Christians that we all need to look at.
Do we look like we've got the love of God?
You all remember the song, you've got the joy, joy, joy, joy down in my heart.
And sometimes as Lutherans, we kind of sing it with a kind of a scowl on our face.
But it's something as Christians we need to look about.
Look at, how do people see us?
Are we different?
And so from this stump, from this dead stump of our sin, rises the branch of redemption, Jesus the Messiah.
And through Him, through Him, your life bears fruit.
Service to others.
You're putting your love into action.
and you're being a messenger of peace in a broken world.
And so from the last word of our epistle this morning, may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace and believing so that by the power of the Holy Spirit you may abound in hope.
Amen.
Now may the peace of God which passes all understanding keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus until life everlasting.